Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes and
today I'm by Doctor Angela Potosnik. She's professor of
philosophy and director of the Center for Public Engagement
with Science at the University of Cincinnati. And today
we're talking about her book Recipes for Science and
Introduction to scientific Methods and Reasoning. So, Doctor Potosnik,
welcome to the show. It's a huge pleasure to
everyone.
Thank you. Thanks for having me.
So let me start by asking you, why should
people care about science because, you know, most people
are not scientists. Many people do not even tend
to read science and related topics. So why should
we, why should people in general care about science?
Yeah, so maybe I have 33 answers to that.
One is um that Science, it turns out, science
and the institutions of science as they have developed,
are one of our best ways to gain knowledge,
uh, not all kinds of knowledge, right? But, but,
uh, uh, very important kinds of knowledge and abilities
in our world. So that makes science pretty important.
Um, AND then beyond that, for, for people who
are not scientists or interested to become scientists, um,
or insiders to science, uh, there still can be
an advantage to knowing something about how science succeeds.
One, in that it can help you know, uh,
when something that looks like good science should be
trusted and, and when, in contrast, it might look
like good science, but be deceptive in one way
or another because unfortunately, there are lots of examples
of that as well. And then secondly, people Um,
in some cases can sort of approximate, and I
think all of us do to some extent kind
of approximate methods that are used, some methods that
are used in science in our everyday lives, um,
and going about our business. So it can be
useful to know kind of how to make use
of uh tips and tricks from science as well.
Yeah, and perhaps, I mean, now a question that
perhaps might might even make people more open to
being interested in science. In what ways does science
have practical applications? Of course, I mean, since I'm
familiar with it, I could perhaps think about 1000
different practical applications that science has, but what would
you, what would be your answer?
Well, um, Uh, so, of course, uh, medicine, right,
and, and sort of health best practices. This is
an important place where not only is, um, biomedical
and other scientific research important, but also as individuals,
we can get some benefit from knowing where the
science stands on, on one topic or another, um,
so that we can make evidence-based decisions about how
to manage our own health, how to manage our
children's health, um, etc. Uh, THAT'S one example. Um,
WHERE else does it matter for people to, to
know about scientific research, um, Uh, you know, quite
broadly, uh, I think statistical tools, um, and, and
just kind of basically statistical concepts, even if, uh,
we're not going to be sort of, um, people
who are using, uh, statistical tools at a level
of sophistication, uh, that we would have like we
had a stats class or something like that, um,
just the very concepts behind the use of statistics
and probabilities I think can be useful.
Mhm. Um, AND why is it that you think
that public opinion so commonly lags behind scientific research?
Because, you know, sometimes when we go on the
street and ask people about certain scientific topics, they
either know But almost nothing about them, or they
give answers that are already outdated. Sometimes they are
decades old answers. So what do you think about?
Yeah, well, so I have 3 different answers. The
first is, um, it's pretty natural that there's a
sort of division of expertise in our society, right?
So, uh, even scientists ask, you know, ask, um,
a climate scientist pointed questions about dark matter research
and and ask and um. Astrophysics and, and they
may not have more expertise than than somebody off
the street, right? So there's a division of expertise
in our society. I would expect scientists to know
more about their area of expertise than than the
lay population and then people who are not in
that area. Um, uh, THEY'RE also, I think, um.
Can be some challenges to um keeping up to
date with scientific findings or knowing and maybe more
to the point, more importantly, knowing how to interpret
and put into perspective scientific findings. And I think
part of the work to be done there is
a better job on the part of scientists and
those who think. Science, like philosophers of science, as
well as science popularizers to help create avenues and
access points, uh, into the latest scientific knowledge, but
maybe more importantly, ways to think about and put
into perspective scientific knowledge, um, so, so that it,
um, sort of all adds up for people who
are not scientists. And then the third answer I
think, um, is that, that, um, Uh, at least
now, I think we find ourselves at a point,
uh, and I say at least now, because maybe
this is not unusual, um, uh, but right now
we find ourselves at a point where, um, scientific
knowledge is, is politicized in certain contexts, and so
some people have some Um, personal and social identity
bound up in, in not knowing more about science,
or at least certain types of science and, and
how it functions. Um, SO that's another kind of,
of challenge and something that I also think philosophers
science are well positioned to, to, uh, weigh in
on.
Mhm. And I think that another very important thing
for people to keep in mind is that uh
science has certain limits. So from an from an
epistemological perspective, what would you say are the limits
of science?
Yeah, um, well, what we say, and that's a
good chance actually, this is the first time I'm
explicitly referencing the recipes for science book, um, and
I do want to say on the front end,
this is of course a co-authored book, so it's
not just me, but I worked with Corey Wright
and Matteo Colombo, two other philosophers of science, um,
on, on this book, um, and it now has
two editions, and we worked together on both editions
of the book. Um, OK, that was enough for
me to forget the question. Uh, LIMITS of science,
I remember, sorry, um. So, uh, the line that
we take in that book is, um, something like,
um, science can tell us about, um, uh, empirical
knowledge or can help generate empirical knowledge about our
world. And so, so this is a way of
um cashing out the idea that Science um proceeds
on the basis of evidence and primarily or at
least uh including empirical evidence that is, uh, information
from our senses, uh, that, that are then recorded
in the form of data and shared among different
people so that we can kind of like all
uh work together to, to, um. Uh, COMPARE and
contrast all of our different, uh, sense data that
bear on, on one thing or another and, and,
uh, formulate arguments about how the world is on
the basis of that data. Um, SO I think
that gives us some, uh, insight into what we
might think of as the, the limits of science.
IS that science is, is best positioned to tell
us um things uh that uh or to answer
questions that, that empirical data can bear on in
one way or another, even if a lot of
times it's pretty indirect, right? It's not sort of
just looking to see what's right in front of
us.
And what do you think about the demarcation problem
that is distinguishing or demarcating science from pseudoscience and
even sometimes also people talk about anti-science. I mean,
do you think that it is really very important
to be able to properly demarcate science from pseudoscience
or not?
Yeah, um, so, so I say yes or yes
and no, and I want to start with a
no. I think it's uh quite natural that that
scientific projects are continuous with other kinds of human
projects. And so, you know, when is engineering science
versus um the application of science. I think that
there are going to be gray areas for questions
like that, and I think that's really uh natural,
sort of natural of the ways that we use
words and And define um categories. Uh, SO that
I think is, is, is normal and not, not
to be concerned uh about, not something we should
be concerned about. Uh, THE thing that starts to
become problematic as you suggest is that because there's
so much societal investment in science, um, and because,
um, many of us, right, have a kind of
implicit trust for scientific findings because we, we know
something about the methods that, that gave rise to
those findings. Um, WE'RE in a situation where some
of Other projects um find it valuable or lucrative
to sort of pretend as if they're more scientific
than they are. And that's where demarcation, I think,
becomes important if, um, uh, projects that don't have
the legitimate hallmark features of science are sort of
working after the fact to try to suggest that
they do in order to gain the trust that
we should reserve for, you know, well vetted scientific
findings, um, that then we as a society need
to be invested in. Uh, SORT of, uh, demonstrating
the ways in which those projects fall short of
science.
By the way, we've been talking a lot about
science, but what is science exactly? I mean, do
we have a proper definition of it?
Oh gosh, um, I wish I could tell you
off the top of my head what the definition
is that we use in, uh, in recipes for
science, uh, and I don't remember off the top
of my head. Um, BUT, um, I think I've
given you the ingredients of what I think science
is, uh, even if I can't give you a,
a pithy, a single phrase in what I've said
so far, which is, um, I think science is,
uh, a set of methods, uh, rooted. Ultimately, uh,
in some sense, in, in empirical data, empirical observations
about the world, um, that's used to, uh, generate
knowledge about our world and abilities to sort of
act in our world effectively. Something like that.
OK. So, and when it comes to uh scientific
methods or the scientific method, I mean, usually, we
tend to talk about the scientific method, but is
there really one single scientific method out there?
This is a point philosophers of science love to
make. No, there's not a single scientific method out
there. Um, AND so this is uh one of
the reasons that we call our book recipes for
Science. Um, I say one because there are other
considerations in, in sort of choosing that title versus
um. Uh, SOME other possibilities that we considered. Um,
BUT we want to emphasize, uh, the plurality there,
right? As well as with the metaphor with recipes,
a kind of open-endedness, right? So even if you're
looking at a bread recipe, you might have margin
notes about what worked for you last time, the
kind of flour that you like. Using it, uh,
etc. And so there's a kind of open-endedness and
customizability, uh, to scientific methods, um, that I think
it's important for us outside of science to, to
recognize about it. It helps us kind of better,
better understand what's going on and what to anticipate.
Mhm. So, now this is a question at the
intersection, I think of philosophy of science and ethics.
Is science simply descriptive or can it also be
prescriptive? Oh,
I think, yeah, I think science quite, quite easily
can be prescriptive. Um, AND so I also think
it's important and in recipes for science, my co-authors
and I take a very broad perspective on what
is science. I consider, uh, social science, for example,
to be properly scientific, just as scientific as uh
as physics and other natural sciences, um. And in
social sciences is a is one place, I don't
think it's the only place you get sort of
normative claims from science by any stretch, but it's
an easy place to look to for examples. Uh,
IF we are using empirical methods to account for
um features of human societies, then, then you're pretty
naturally in a place where, um, taking on board
certain aims for One question or another about about
human practices and gathering data about that it puts
you in a good position to make recommendations based
on um what what aims um uh society might
want to achieve that you as a scientist have
sort of taken on board for your work.
Mhm. In science, when we talk about hypotheses and
theories, uh, what does each of them mean and
how do we distinguish one from the other? Yeah,
so, so, um, we follow, I think, a pretty,
pretty common way of thinking about these terms in
recipes for science. Um, HYPOTHESIS, uh, uh, we use
a lot throughout, uh, the book, and the idea
here is that these are conjectures about the world,
um, whereas theories, um, Uh, first and foremost, we
can think about, uh, scientific theories as, as being
corroborated, as having a substantial amount of evidence to
support them. Um, uh, A sort of scientific theory
that is communicated as such, named as a theory,
shows up in a, in a textbook, etc. um,
THIS doesn't happen until there's a lot of evidence,
uh, to sort of shift the scientific community towards
taking that theory seriously as something that might be,
be true about our world. Um. Uh, SO that's
a big difference between hypotheses and theories. Hypotheses can
be kind of open-ended conjectures, right? You might be
out on a limb or a scientist might be
out on a limb on, uh, a particular hypothesis
that they're investigating, whereas a theory is kind of
well corroborated by the time it's named a theory.
Um, SOMETHING that lurks in the background of what
I've already said is, um, And I don't know
exactly how to say this well, um, but we
also say something like this in, in the book
that, um, uh, theories are kind of, um, Uh,
they tend to be bigger and grander, um, kind
of, uh, networked, uh, series of claims about how
the world, uh, is rather than, than hypotheses tend
to be, uh, sort of small, um, specific claims
that can be kind of operationalized for investigation. So
there's also a way in which theories kind of
put together a successful hypotheses and articulate kind of
the, uh, a framework of understanding the world on,
on that basis.
Mhm. And what are the different kinds of ways
we can set up experiments in science? I mean,
if I want to do a scientific experiment, how
can I go about it?
Uh, WELL, there too, right? The answer is lots
of different ways. Um, AND this isn't, uh, I
want to say on the front end, an area
of philosophical expertise for me in particular. One of
the nice things about having co-authors for this book
is we did try to give a really even-handed,
um, expansive treatment of um the different features, uh,
of scientific methods and patterns of reasoning, um. Uh,
SO, uh, so I don't work in philosophy of
experiment in particular. Um, BUT in general, um, uh,
experimentation in, in science is, is open-ended, as I
suggested methods are in general in science. Um, HOW
we talk about experiments in, in this book is
starting with kind of a core, uh, description of,
of, uh, what we think, and I think this,
this follows kind of con conventional wisdom. What we
think, um, experiments are. Designed to try to approximate,
which is ultimately influence, you know, sort of extraneous
influence on the independent variable, uh, control of all,
uh, extraneous, um, variables, um, so that there aren't
confounding variables and, and sort of, um, attention to
or measurement of, uh, the dependent variable to see
how it, um, how the dependent variable responds to
a change to an intervention on the Independent variable.
And then all of the variety that you see
in experiments, sort of, um, uh, comes from different
ways of trying to accomplish that goal. So one
really basic, uh, difference is, are you in sort
of, uh, a lab, uh, looking at a physical
system where you can directly control most of the
variables that aren't your independent variable or your dependent
variable? Or are you trying to conduct an experiment
out on, out. In the field somewhere, uh, and
you need to indirectly control, um, variables with, for
example, the use of statistical techniques. Um, AND, and
then sort of differences, uh, sort of, as, as
that suggests, differences kind of grow from there, right?
So you might be in the field, you might
be in the lab, depending on the types of
uh phenomenon that you're investigating different types of techniques
will be in order or, uh, you might be
able to be in a lab or, or that
might not even be possible. Um, I guess another
difference is, um, hypotheses, uh, might be more directly
amenable to experimental investigation or scientists might have to
do some work before they even know what they
would anticipate seeing, uh, and, and, and what kind
of experimental system, uh, for some hypothesis that they
have. Um. So that's pretty abstract, but that starts
to gesture at some of the variety. The emphasis
there is, I think that there is variety and
that there's not sort of one best way to
do it. So, so one of the things that
sort of makes me grouchy is when, when, uh,
scientists suggest that a certain way of doing science
or a certain field of science is sort of
better or more trustworthy, um. Uh, THEN another, and
I think, I think that's not really fair. Mhm.
Is all of science experimental in terms of its
methodology, or are there also non-experimental methods in science?
Yeah, so that's something we really want to emphasize
in the book as well. Um, SO we have
a chapter on experiment and then we follow it
directly with a chapter on, um, non-experimental um studies.
Um, SO there's a range of different ways of
conducting studies in science, uh, when phenomena are not.
I should say when phenomena or the particular hypothesis
under investigation are not sort of well set up
for direct uh experimental um interventions. Um, SO yeah,
there are a range of non-experimental uh studies that
are techniques in science, um, uh. And so in
that chapter, sort of some of the, the easiest
way to see that are are sort of studies
that that in one way or another kind of
try to approximate some of the control that experiments
give us, but then there are different kinds of
techniques entirely, such as a meta-analysis, right? Using existing
data to try to sort of um Uh, draw
conclusions from the different kinds of data received in
different, uh, across different experiments. Um, AND then there
are, there's also another approach, um, of non-experimental studies,
which is, uh, for us, uh, the focus of,
um, yet another chapter following directly on our non-experimental
chapters, which is, uh, scientific modeling, right? So, so
using computers, mathematical modeling techniques, etc. TO stand in
for some of the work that's done, uh, in
experiments.
So you mentioned scientific modeling there. What is that?
I mean, how do we model in science and
what is the model?
Yeah, so, um, scientific models, um, can take lots
of different forms. Um, SEEMS like the sort of
basic characteristics is, um, that, uh, scientists develop a
system, so maybe I should use scare quotes, develop
a system because that's where, where some of the
difference come in. I'll say more about what I
mean by developing a system in a second. Um,
AND study that system in order to learn something
about the world that they're interested to know about,
right? So, uh, uh, maybe one kind of, um,
well, actually I'll, I'll start with the starting point,
uh, that we have for discussing models in the
book, which is, um, physical scale models, right? Um,
IN the book, we focus on, um, the San
Francisco Bay model that was uh developed several decades
ago by the Army Corps of Engineers. This is,
uh, an example that philosopher of science, Michael Weisberg,
uh, introduced, um, to the field of philosophy of
science and sort of, um, is well recognized, I
think, um, uh, from his work. Um, AND, uh,
the Army Corps of Engineers literally built a scale
model of the San Francisco Bay in order to
study how, um, um, interventions on the real bay,
uh, that, that, um, uh, policymakers were considering making,
uh, would affect the bay, um, what, what the
results would be, right? And the nice thing about
that is that they could study this. They worked
really hard to set up, you know, a really
large Scale model. It's, it's more than 1 acre
big if, if memory serves, but much smaller than
the full San Francisco Bay in the world, um,
and, and much quicker acting. And they were able
to sort of make interventions on the model to
see what would happen, because it's sort of relevantly
similar to the real bay. Um, BEFORE, you know,
if you had just gone in there and started
building dams in the San Francisco Bay, then, then,
um, you would have found out how that affected
the system, uh, really kind of too late, right,
after some of the damage had been done. Um,
OK, so that's an example of a scale model
of, of how you might be able to and
why you might want to, to look at, um,
sort of a sort of toy model over here
to try to see what would happen in, uh,
to the system in the real world that you're
interested in. But the same basic technique I think
is used, um, when scientists, as increasingly happen, um,
develop computer models, right? Find variables and, and, uh,
sort of, um, uh, dynamics in a computerized system,
right, a computer game effectively. Um, 11 kind or
another, um, to represent, uh, or, uh, kind of
reflect how things would play out in the real
world. Um, SO this is done, for example, a
lot with climate modeling now, uh, climate modeling uses
computer, um, modeling techniques, um, as one, as one
example, lots of fields do. Um, AND then, and
then we think also, I think we here is
philosophers science in general that the same basic and
maybe scientists as well, the same basic um practice
is um playing out when scientists write equations, right?
To, to, to try to represent a system, um,
choose their variables to represent features of interest, and
then uh solve the equations, um, uh, or see
how, how the dynamics play out, um, in a
way that represents, um. Uh, REAL activities in the
world, and so those, uh, we think of as
mathematical models. So all of those, uh, um, philosophers
science are used to thinking of as kind of
the same basic technique, even they, even though they
go about, um, modeling systems in different ways.
And what is the relationship between the scientific model
and the reality or the aspects of reality that
it is trying to model?
Yeah, we, we emphasize in our book that, um,
uh, first of all, that relationship is, is often
seen in philosophy of science as representation, right? In
the, in the way that I, I talked about
this sort of model standing in, in some sense
for the real world. Um, YOU can study the
model and then draw conclusions about the system in
the world that's supposed to represent on the basis.
On that basis. And, uh, we emphasize in the
book that, uh, that relies on a kind of
relevant similarity or set of relevant similarities between the
model or features of the model and the system
that's being modeled. Um, AND, but notice that effective
modeling, right? The whole idea of, of using a
model. INSTEAD of the studying, studying the system itself
relies also on relevant differences. So I emphasize when
I talked about the bay model right away that
it's important that the San Francisco Bay model is
a lot smaller than the real San Francisco Bay
and that it's quicker acting, right? And so, so,
um. Moers, scientific modelers, um, develop, uh, models again
of one kind or another, mathematical equations, um, computer
models, um, physical models, etc. um, IN ways, uh,
that, um, uh, so that the models are, are
relevant relevantly similar in certain respects to the systems
they're interested in, but then also relevantly different, uh,
so that they can sort of, um, Um, so
they're convenient and, and, and usable in a way
that that direct investigation of the system wouldn't be.
And how do we know that a particular model
is a good or at least a good enough
model? Yeah,
it's a, it's a hugely challenging question. Um, NOTICE
that that it's uh similar to questions that we
have about experiments too, though. This isn't a special
question for models, right? When is, um, an experimental
system enough like the phenomenon in the world that,
that what we saw happen in the lab is
gonna happen in In the real world too. And
so the same question happens for models. Um, HOW
do we know that, uh, right, if the San
Francisco Bay model uh responded this way to, to
the intervention under consideration to building dams, etc. THAT
the real San Francisco Bay will, um, it's, it's
a hugely challenging question. Um, AND, and at the
heart of it is again the sort of relevant
similarity question, I think. And so checking to see
whether the parameters of the model, um, that you
think matter, that the scientist thinks matters to the
phenomenon under investigation, checking to see that those parameters
are the same or relevantly similar, right? Um, SO
maybe scaled, right, in the, in the case of
the scale physical model. Um. Uh, AND then, and
then checking to see which parameters matter. So that,
so, um, it's easy to just, uh, imagine that
that we have answers to what the relevant similarities
need to be, but it could be, and it
regularly is the case that scientists discovered that something
they thought didn't matter is something that's important, um,
to, to, is an important feature of the system.
And so, I kind of, um, got lost to
the details there. So just characterize that again. This
is a really hard question. When, uh, is the
kind of results in the model trustworthy? There's not
a single answer, I think, to like, here's how
you know, and we've done that and we're done.
Um, BUT that the answer includes at least two
ingredients. First of all, ensuring that there's the kind
of relevant similarity and the parameters that matter. Um,
BUT then secondly, ensuring that that you've actually accurately
identified the main parameters that matter for the particular
phenomenon that you're interested in, um, in order to
have sort of assessed that effectively.
Right. So let me now ask you a little
bit about scientific reasoning. Could you tell us about
the concepts of reasoning, inference, and argument?
Yeah, so, so, um, this is a part of
the book that, that my co-author Corey Wright, um,
is more responsible for than I am, um, but
I'll do my best. Um, SO, um, there's a
big shift in the topics of our book from
the kinds of topics that you and I have
been talking about so far, right? How scientific experiments
work, um, scientific models, etc. TO taking a step
back and thinking about the, the reasoning patterns that
you see in science. And so we want to
emphasize that, um, Uh, in science, it's not as
if you sort of set up an experiment and
or it's not as if scientists set up an
experiment, get the data, and then have a check
mark or next next to their hypothesis, and they're
done. Instead, um, data, uh, sort of are, are
points where, uh, empirical information about the world weigh
in on what actually can be quite elaborate scientific
arguments. OK. So what we mean by arguments are
sort of um um ways of Marshaling evidence um
using reasoning in order to assemble, um, reasons in
support of uh a scientific conclusion, right? So, so
I, I suppose you can say that sort of
um developing official scientific arguments, uh, it can, as
a way of moving us from um empirical data
weighing on hypotheses towards putting together. Um, A sort
of, you know, uh, theoretical structure like we talked
about a theory that kind of, um, uh, is,
is a good guess of how the world really
is. Um, SO one of the things that we
wanted to emphasize in the contrast between reasoning and
arguments is that arguments have, in the way that
we use the term, have this, this structure of
kind of uh socially available to the community of
scientists, written down, right, or sort of um officially
worked through, uh, in a way that um Uh,
is it, is, um, useful for the, um, social,
um, project that science is, right, where different scientists
work across different projects and experiments to kind of
um marshal evidence in favor of, um, or opposed
to um different ideas. Um, EN route to to
developing theories, um, about our world, um, and in
contrast, reasoning is sort of, um, you know, quite
broad, uh, an important feature of science, uh, where,
where any individual scientist, um, does this on a
regular basis, often without even recognizing it in how
they connect empirical data to to ideas, confirming, dis
confirming hypotheses, etc.
So, uh, and in science, we have not only
inductive reasoning, but also deductive and abductive reasoning, right?
I mean, because sometimes people have these, there's this
very common idea that all reasoning in science is
inductive in the sense that if it works, then
it means it's true or scientifically true, but we
also, we can also use deduction and abduction in
science,
right? Yeah, and this is one place where work
that philosophers of science, um, uh, sort of has
something to offer for how we more broadly think
about, about, um, argumentation or reasoning in science. Um,
AND so, um, I guess speaking for myself, I
think that the three types of reasoning that my
co-authors and I identify in that book, as you
said, inductive reasoning, deductive reasoning, and abductive reasoning. Um,
THERE'S something important. Uh, ABOUT each of those forms
of reasoning that, that kind of um helps us
see something deep and interesting about science itself. So
starting with deductive reasoning, as we do in the
book, um, deductive reasoning is this kind of super
fancy special kind of reasoning that philosophers science think
a lot about insofar as, as, um, we use
logic and study logic, um. Uh, AND mathematics, etc.
um, AND deductive reasoning, uh, is sort of super
special and fancy in that, um, uh, it's a
there it, it provides a kind of certainty and
guarantee that inductive and abductive forms of reasoning can't.
So, um, a valid. Uh, INDUCTIVE argument, uh, which
is the sort of term of art, right, valid,
um, uh, deductive validity here, means that uh if
the premises, if the starting points of the argument
are true, then the conclusion absolutely has to be
true as well. And there are interesting ways that,
that, um, Uh, scientific methods can make use of
that feature of um deductive argumentation. And it's worth
noting, um, in general, uh, this isn't something, uh,
that can conclude the truth of hypotheses about our
world, right, beyond a shadow of a doubt, um,
but there's sort of ways of, of um recruiting,
uh, deductively valid arguments, um, in order to sort
of, um, Uh, structure, um, the, the patterns of
reasoning that we see in science, um, in certain
special jobs. Um, INDUCTIVE reasoning, um, as, as you
already suggested, um, is sort of, um, important broadly
in science and is generally the kind of reasoning
process behind, um, marshaling evidential support for against a
hypothesis. Um, AND I would say that the important
characteristic to notice here about inductive reasoning is that
it's the opposite of deductive reasoning in the sense
that it goes beyond, right, the conclusion goes beyond
the premises, the starting points of the argument. Um,
AND so an important thing to notice there is
that there is a kind of conjecture or, or
moving beyond our evidential basis, kind of, you know,
um, putting yourself out there, uh, in what you're
concluding. Um, AND, and as you say, that's an
um I think widely seen to be an important
feature of, of science, that, that hypotheses really kind
of no matter how much data we've gotten, um,
hypotheses and even our theories, um, are, are well
corroborated theories are kind of um conjectural, um, about
the world. And then briefly abductive reasoning, what we
want to emphasize there is, um, that there's also
an important kind of reasoning in science that that
doesn't just kind of generalize inductively from the sort
of things we see in our, our world, but
that looks at the sort of evidence we have
access to, um, to, um, in some cases, put
together a sort of a, a potentially explanatory story
about why those features of the world seem the
way that they are. That might appeal to um
uh features of our world that we can't directly
test experimentally, right? So, so, um, some scientific theories
get beyond positing things that we can just directly,
uh, check for, um, and posit sort of explanatory
features of the world that we have to Um,
you know, to some extent or another, uh, sort
of take on faith, right? So, so, um, uh,
the Higgs boson, right? The most recent, um, uh,
fundamental particle that, that, uh, um, was announced as,
as having been discovered. Um, THERE'S evidence, uh, for
the Higgs boson, but nobody can sort of look
at one under a microscope.
Mhm. Right. And what role do statistics and probability
play in science and is all of science statistical
and probabilistic or not?
Yeah, good question. So here I'll say that my
co-author Matteo Colombo is really our expert on probability
and statistics um for our author group, um, but
uh I'll do my best again. Um, um, uh,
PROBABILITY and statistics are incredibly important. Science, um, that
said, not all science, um, proceeds, um, with the
use of statistics, right? So it's not as if,
um, you have to check and make sure that,
that a scientific article is using statistics before you
know whether it's real science or not, right? Um.
The reason, or a reason that pro probabilistic reasoning
and um the tools of statistics are so useful
in science, uh, from my perspective is that it's
an exceedingly complex world that we live in. Lots
of things are interacting all over the place, uh,
including in the systems that we're interested in, including
even in sort of well, um, uh, set up.
Experimental systems, right? Experiments. Um, AND statistical tools can
let you, or, or have, uh, uh, again, lots
of different tricks, right? Lots of different ways of,
of helping scientists, um, find, identify patterns, um, and,
and sort of move, put to the side that
the noise, the different influences that, that can obscure
patterns.
Mhm. So, uh, this is a question that I
think uh relates to something that people, even lay
people tend to be more exposed to, particularly in
the news when it comes to statistical methods in
science. Um, HOW can they be used to make,
to make estimates about the population from a sample?
Because, you know, many times when people hear about
statistics uh uh in the news, they think, oh,
but that didn't particularly, for example, in medicine. Uh,
THEY, they tend to say, oh, but that didn't
really happen to me, and I know someone who
had, for example, side effects of vaccine or something
like that. So, uh, tell us, how can we
make estimates from just a sample of the entire
population.
Yes, this is an incredibly important use of statistics,
um, and so, so as you suggest, um, uh.
11 use of uh statistical methods, um, very widespread
use is to um uh look at um uh
only a subset of um a group, um could
be people, could be, you know, etc. um, DOESN'T
have to be people, uh, a subset of a
group of one kind or another, uh, and, um,
uh. So this actually starts to, what I'm going
to say at least starts to sound a lot
like what I was saying about modeling. Um, SO
first of all, uh, the scientists check to ensure
that the group under investigation, let's just stick with
people because that is an intuitive example and it's,
it's uh where you started us in, in thinking
about it. Um, AND so scientists, first of all,
check to ensure. Sure that the group under investigation
is relevantly similar to the full population. So if
your full population that you're worried about is, um,
right, all Americans, uh uh um trying to avoid
anything socially controversial, um, sorry, I'm not good with
uh examples off the top of my head. Um,
IF we're looking for all Americans, uh, and, um,
what the health impacts are of eating at least
one serving of green vegetable a day, right? Um,
THEN you want to make sure the scientists want
the health researchers want to make sure that the
population under study is relevantly similar to all Americans,
uh, if this is the, the population. Investigation. So
if um they're researching a class of kindergarteners, this
isn't this isn't going to, to work, right? Uh,
WE need to make sure that we have um
people of different ages, different types of lifestyles more
generally, different uh uh background health conditions, etc. SUCH
that the the um group under investigation is relevantly
similar to the full population. Um, BUT then there's
something kind of magical that happens, which is if
the, uh, group is sufficiently large, right? You can't
just study one person and see how eating at
least one serving of vegetable a day is good
for that person. Um, YOU have to have some,
some variety among your subjects, but if you have
a sufficiently large group, um, actually it doesn't have
to be all that large, and I can't give
you a number off the top of my head,
but like 100 people is probably good. Um. Uh,
OFTENTIMES medical studies are, are much larger than that.
Um, SO sufficiently large group that's relevantly similar to
the population under study, um, then you're able to
project what uh the features of the full population
are on the basis of the features or the,
the responses of, um, this, this group in particular.
I mean, we many times hear about correlation and
causation and how correlation doesn't necessarily imply causation. So
in science, what is the relationship between correlation and
causation?
Yeah, so there's not a single answer to give
here. I mean, I think you just characterized the
most important thing to remember, um, and that is
correlation and, and identifying correlations in science is an
incredibly in a variety of circumstances is an incredibly
important guide to causal relationships. But as we've all
been taught, you know, through school, uh correlation does
not in itself constitute causation. There are other questions
to ask when you see a correlation, a simple
correlation before you know there's a causal relationship. Um,
SO one way that correlation is, is really important
is in, um, uh, statistical, uh, hypothesis testing, right?
So, so when you have, uh, an experimental group
and a control group, let's go back to our,
um, people who eat at least one vegetable serving
of vegetable a day. So for our experimental group
is um being asked to have. At least one
serving of vegetable a day and we measure our
control group and say see that on balance they
don't achieve that, something like that. Um, THEN the
correlation uh in the health outcomes of the experimental
group, right, the, the reduced incidence of cancer, uh,
to, to choose one real effect of, of increasing
vegetable consumption. Um, IS a guide to, um, uh,
there being a causal relationship, that is a guide
to, um, across people with, with all of different,
uh, sort of background health conditions, ages, etc. um,
uh, THAT if you choose to or if you
consume at least one serving of vegetable a day,
you'll see sort of a correlation with decreased, uh,
incidence of cancer. Um, SO that's 11 context, scientific
context in which correlation is an important guide to
causation, but like I said, sort of there are
lots of different ways in which it can be.
Um, BUT, right, uh, kind of a lot of
the, the, um, hoops that scientists jump through in
creating controlled studies or using uh statistical techniques, uh,
and, um, different, um, uh, techniques, uh, for conducting
non-experimental studies are all developed to try to, um,
Keep correlations from fooling us, right? To, to try
to make it so that we don't infer causation
mistakenly from correlations, because all sorts of things are
correlated in our world, uh, getting, getting back to
sort of the, the complex world, um, uh, that
we live in, as I, as I pointed out
earlier.
Mhm. And so, how do we determine causation in
science then?
Yeah, so, so, so lots of different ways. This
is, I think the same question is asking me,
uh, sort of, um, uh, um, basically the same
question is asking me sort of uh what experiments
are in science, um. Uh, WHETHER there are multiple
different scientific methods, etc. So much of that is
focused on, um, trying to, uh, I guess it's,
I'm overstating slightly, but, but so much of scientific
methods are, um, trying to determine where there are
causal relationships. Um. And so, um, variable control, right,
intervention, um, in an experiment with control, with uh
variable control, control of extraneous variables is one technique.
Uh, STATISTICAL methods, um, to try to discern patterns
across, um, variety, uh, and outcomes across a data
set is another technique, um. Uh, CAREFUL, uh, uh,
development of arguments, right, on the basis of, um,
statistical reasoning from data, uh, is another part, uh,
of a technique that's, that's quite important, uh, and
the list goes on.
Mhm. So let me ask you now a little
bit about the explanation in science because there are
different, or at least in the book you talk
about different uh conceptions of explanation, including nomological pattern-based
and causal conceptions of explanation. So, tell us about
that.
So this is a place um where the book,
uh, our book becomes kind of more similar to
what you see and more work in philosophy of
science, right? So philosophers of science, including me, uh,
love to argue about uh what successful scientific explanations
look like. That is what features successful scientific explanations
have. Um, AND, uh, at least some characterizations of
that debate among philosophers of science identify, um, sort
of as kind of core um positions, at least
that have been held, held historically, uh, the philosophers
who want to emphasize, uh, a deductive relationship, um,
um, between, um, uh, an explanation and the phenomenon
it explains, those who want to emphasize the importance
of, um, Um, as, as we put it in
the book, uh, sort of, um, uh, demonstrating patterns,
right, or, or, or revealing patterns, um, uh, general
patterns, uh, by providing an explanation that sort of
bringing together multiple different kinds of phenomena, and then,
um, Uh, more recently and, and, and really significantly
in the field of philosophy, those who want to
emphasize that explanations cite causes. And so the move
that we make in recipes for Science is to
sort of try to consider um what each of
these philosophical views of explanation gets right, and then
sort of What seemed to be the kind of
downsides or shortcomings of each of these accounts. And
so we're not sort of setting this up as
a philosophical debate about what, what type of a
kind of explanation is correct, but, but rather suggesting
that there are resources um for thinking about explanatory
reasoning and science from, from each of these uh
philosophical views about scientific explanation.
So earlier we talked a little bit about the
limits of science, but now I, I want to
ask you a more specific or uh question. What,
what are the limitations of explanation in science?
Um, Can you say a little bit more about
what you mean?
Uh, I mean, when we're trying to explain something
in science, uh, what can be the limitations of
doing that through scientific, uh, through the scientific method
or the scientific methods.
Yeah, all right, thanks for saying a little bit
more. I needed a little bit more to kind
of motivate my, my instincts on how I wanted
to answer. Um, um, I, I, I don't know
that I have anything general to say here. Um,
AND I don't know that there is something that
can, can be said on the front end about
sort of, uh, where science needs to end, right?
Or something like that. Um, BUT I do think
at least one place to start to look, um,
to, to get some instinct for Where that line
might be is in, um, this connection that we
made, uh, or that I made between, um, scientific
knowledge and, um, sort of, uh, uh, an, a
basis ultimately in, um, empirical information about our world.
Um, AND so there, when we get sort of
distant enough from Uh, any basis in empirical evidence,
um, is where it starts to get unclear, um,
whether we're still in a place that we can
sort of generate properly scientific knowledge.
So let us talk now a little bit about
scientific breakthroughs and revolution. So what counts as a
scientific breakthrough because we hear that uh concept or
that term a lot, what does it mean?
Yeah, good. So, so maybe I just want to
say that scientific breakthroughs are when Um, some major
advance, um, has occurred, and, and often this means,
uh, in a way that we couldn't have predicted,
right? So, so the Higgs boson discovery I mentioned
earlier and we use that example in, in the
book, um, this was a breakthrough because, right, it
could, the data could have, could have turned out
otherwise, um, but, but scientists, uh, Uh, you know,
the, the Large Hadron Collider, um, got data that
confirmed that the, um, existence of a new fundamental
particle that had been conjectured, conjectured. Uh, SO there's
a breakthrough in what we take to be true
about the world, uh, in, in that base, uh,
sort of in that kind of occasion.
Mhm. And this change in science occur in revolutions
or is it mostly non-revolutionary? Good.
Yeah, so, so we do, we talk about, um,
you know, Thomas Koon's really famous work on um
theory change and specifically this idea that Um, if
we look at the history of science, we don't
just see cumulative progress and gaining more and more
sort of knowledge about our world, but we see,
uh, as you say, scientific revolutions. We see, according
to Kuhn, major changes in what scientists take to
be fundamental to the world, um. And Coon really
emphasizes that um science can have this character and
that there's a way in which that threatens cumulative
progress and kind of this simple picture of of
scientific advances. Um, SO you're asking, right, does most
scientific change Look like that. Um, uh, I think
the answer to that quite clearly and, and lots
of, uh, philosopher of science have said this in
response to a Konian view. No, that lots of
scientific change looks like the more standard cumulative progress.
Um, EVEN Kuon probably is OK with that. There
is a question of sort of um to what
extent um Kuon uh Kunian scientific revolutions happen across
science and continue to happen, or whether he sort
of picked on uh found particular instances of scientific
change that have this feature, and science can have
this feature, whereas, uh, often it doesn't happen that
way. Um, AND so that's maybe where I would
land is I would want to say, I think
it's interesting and challenging and worthwhile to focus on.
These periods of, of theory change that include a
kind of radical rethinking of, of what's fundamentally true
about our world, um, but then also to appreciate
that those are really exceptions, um, and that historically
there are just lots of instances of, of pretty
direct cumulative change and progress in science. And then
of course there are interesting philosophical questions to ask
about the sort of Radical theory change, um, periods
of science, even if these are really unusual, right?
Is there any any way to talk about ways
in which uh scientific progress has occurred even with
that kind of radical change? Um, THESE are really
interesting philosophical questions. Um, WHAT we do in that
book really is, is, um, sort of leave those
open, but, but our focus, um, you know, for
sort of a, a broad undergraduate students, um, population
that we're imagining is. We, as we wrote the
book, is we emphasize the ways in which scientific
knowledge is trustworthy, even if it's possible, still in
the future that we might have this kind of
uh radical scientific change, um, because I think that's
an argument that that can be made, right? That,
that we can know that that scientific knowledge, uh,
as we have it today is uh sort of
trustworthy, um, even if, uh, this kind of possibility
of radical change is raised.
Mhm. So there's also this very common idea among
some science enthusiasts that are probably not very philosophically
sophisticated when it comes to uh science where they
say that science is an institution that, that is
sort of impermeable to outside influences like for example,
the social and historical context. Is that really the
case?
Absolutely not. I do have strong opinions on this
one. So scientists are people, right? Um, SCIENTISTS bring
to their work like the rest of us, kind
of background ideas about how the world is, things
that they're interested in, things that they're not interested
in, and all of that provides a way for
scientific projects to reflect the the going concerns uh
at a certain time in history, in a particular
community, etc. Um, YOU also get something you know
I haven't talked about that much, um. Yet in
this conversation, you also get um uh in with
science, um, and important to scientific methods as well,
a sort of um robust community uh with norms
around. How exchanges happen, um, ways in which you
need to be sort of open in your work
to uh external critique from other scientists, etc. Um,
SO, even as, um, scientists values, I think influence
the kind of things that they work on. Um,
AND the kind of techniques they use, etc. um,
THE, the role that those values play and how
those values influence the science is also sort of
subject to critique, uh, by one's peers in a
way that, uh, to some extent weeds out, uh,
at least some kinds of influences that that those
values can have.
Mhm. So tell us more about that bit that
you just mentioned. I mean, how important is it
in science for, for us to have sort of
um Let's say, uh, a cognitively diverse population of
scientists to uh critique each other, each other's work.
Um, YEAH, very important, and this is, this is
an idea that's gains kind of broader attraction, not
just in philosophy of science, but among scientists and
kind of broader discourse about science as well, um,
over the last several decades. Um, HAVING a variety
of, of scientists with different backgrounds. Grounds and different
sort of um antecedents, right, prior beliefs about the
world, um, is incredibly useful in making sure that
uh the kind of questions and challenges that should
be raised have been raised, right? If we have
lots of different perspectives um coming into to an
investigation, um. Uh, YEAH, and then, and then I
think one of, one of the ways that that
this can play a role in science that I've
emphasized in some of my other work is, um,
uh, one of the, the starting points that I
gave for where, um, values and personality traits and
sort of social identities can influence science is just
in what you want to study. And that sounds
so boring and obvious, right? So I'm interested in
biology for this reason, or, um, right, I want
to study cancer because some of my family has
been uh affected by cancer, etc. Um, THESE kinds
of mundane ways in which um scientists' attention are
directed in 11 place or another, I think actually.
Um, INFLUENCE in really subtle ways, features of the
research that's carried out, um, such that, um, uh,
the kinds of knowledge we have about the world,
right? Maybe this is a simple example, back to
the cancer example. If, um, if we have, uh,
scientists motivated to study lots of different kinds of
cancer, right? Uh, THEN we will, um, uh, generate,
uh, as a scientific establishment, uh, um. Um, I,
um, biomedical establishment, lots of different knowledge about different
types of cancer versus if we have scientists who,
who, um, are mainly focused on the most prevalent
forms of cancer, then we'll then we'll miss out
on a lot of that. Um, SO even if
this is sort of a simple straightforward way in
which um values can influence science, I think it
ends up sort of, um, Having implications for the
type of scientific knowledge that is amassed in a
way that ends up being really important.
Mhm. Is exclusion and marginalization based on social categories
like race, ethnicity, nationality, gender, and so on still
a thing in science?
Alas, it seems like it is, yeah, um, right,
so of course, um, a lot of science, um,
uh, and a lot of funding for science, um,
happened in some nations versus others, so it's, it's
easier to become a scient scientist and participate in
science if uh you have some citizenship in the
world versus others, um, and there's still, uh, disparities
in, um, the, uh, social. Identities of folks who
um are participating in science. There's still, you know,
sort of um gaps in citation rates, uh, and
grant uh famously sort of got a lot of
attention the last few years, sort of grant success
of scientists with different identities, and I'm sure it's,
you know, very complex as to why that's so,
but yes, this is a continuing challenge in science.
And uh how should we approach that issue? I
mean, do you think that we would need more
uh DEI programs or something like that?
Uh, YEAH, uh, to some, to some extent, this
is beyond my job, right? This is a question
for someone who does science policy. Um, I think.
Um, THE part that I'm comfortable thinking about is,
uh, the ways in which, um, um, social identities
can influence the kind of, or let me say
more broadly, the ways in which, um, having diverse
social identities uh in science is valuable for the
scientific enterprise, makes it so that science is better
at gaining knowledge, gains more trustworthy knowledge, and is
sort of improved among among across other dimensions as
well. Um. Yeah, how we get there I think
is a is a thorny set of questions and
and will certainly depend on sort of particular um
political context uh as well as sort of um
facts on the ground about science.
OK, so I have one last topic that I
would like to ask you about. Earlier, you mentioned
how science is not really value-free and the values
of scientists play a role in how they produce
scientific knowledge. Can science really ever be value-free?
Um, WELL, I think, I think it's important to,
to follow up with a, a question back to
you, but what do you, what do you mean
by can it really be value free?
Uh, I mean, I, I, ideally, I guess the
values brought to the table by scientific practitioners would
not play a role at all in their production
of scientific knowledge, I guess. Yeah, thank
you. Um, uh, SO in that sense, I think
no, um, because of what I said before, I
think, I think the kind of scientific knowledge that
we amass will always be influenced by Our values,
um, and the especially the values of the scientists
investigating our world. Um, NOW it is the case
if we have scientists with with lots of different
values and who challenge each other's values and look
for for in a phenomenon that uh other scientists
haven't identified to study, etc. THAT to some extent.
That this kind of mitigates the the downside to
that, right? Then we have lots of different people
looking for different kinds of scientific knowledge or doing
different kinds of scientific work uh to develop different
kinds of knowledge. Um, BUT that project will always,
I think, uh, and essentially be based in, um,
what scientists as individuals and then scientists as a
collective body, um, are prioritizing in a in a
way that You know, yeah, we, we, uh, uh,
we'll we'll find its way into what kinds of
knowledge we amass.
Mhm. So one last question then, if science cannot
be value-free, is that problematic in any way?
Uh, I don't think so. Yeah, so, so again,
kind of another work that I've done, I've, I've
emphasized that I think to make sense of the
features of science, we should see it as a
tool that humans have developed to serve our purposes.
And that's a way in which ultimately when we
zoom. Really far out, um, fundamentally, science is, um,
uh, a, um, set of methods and a community
and a set of practices for, for gaining knowledge
about the world that are, that are linked to
sort of embedded in. Uh, THE questions we humans,
uh, in particular humans, right, who have happened to
be scientists have about the world. Um, SO I
just think that's inherent to what science is. Um,
IT is, it is ultimately perspectival. It happens from
our distinctively, um, uh, human perspectives, uh, and, and
to support our distinctively human aims.
Mhm. Great. So, the book is again recipes for
science and introduction to scientific methods and reasoning. And
of course, I'm leaving a link to it in
the description of the interview. And Doctor Potosnik, just
before we go, apart from the book, would you
like to tell people where they can find you
and your work on the internet?
Sure. Um, SO I do have a website. Um,
IT'S just my full name, Angela Potocnikwithout apace.com, um,
and so you can get an overview of my,
uh, articles as well as the other books that
I've written, um, and then some, some like sort
of, um, online present stuff like this interview there,
um. Uh, AND yeah, besides recipes for science, um,
which I've co-authored, um, I have a book, Idealization
and the aims of Science, uh, that was published
in 2017, um, and a more recent short book
Science and the Public, um, uh, which came out
about a year ago. Um, YEAH, I don't know,
that's a start. It's a couple of things I
can say.
Yeah, great. I will be leaving some links to
that in the description of the interview as well,
and thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show. It's been a very
informative conversation.
Thank you, Ricardo. Yeah, this has been fun. I
appreciate it.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londonorea. Yannick
Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine, Gary
Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus
Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Eringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren, Jeff
McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula
Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.